---
layout: post
title: "Setting up a git server on macOS 10.12"
date: 2017-02-07
---
I'm working on learning the [Go language](https://golang.org/ "GoLang"). In order to do so, I'm going through the exercises in [The Go Programming Language](https://books.google.com/books/about/The_Go_Programming_Language.html?id=SJHvCgAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover). But before I got too far, it seemed worthwhile to set up a git repo to hold the code. The [git docs](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-on-the-Server-Setting-Up-the-Server) provide useful info for making this go on linux, but I wanted to make it work on my mac. And after a bit of work, I came up with the following process for setting up a git server:

# Set up a git user
We're going to want a git user that doesn't have login permissions, so that there's a service account to own the files in the repo. There's no `adduser` command, and on the mac these days, everything is done via opendirectory. On macOS 10.12, the following sequence of commands will create a git user:
<code>
sudo dscl localhost create /Local/Default/Users/git    # username is git
sudo dscl localhost create /Local/Default/Users/git RealName "git repo management"
sudo dscl localhost create /Local/Default/Users/git Password '*'    # should not be able to login via password
sudo dscl localhost create /Local/Default/Users/git UniqueID 250    # Pick something unique
sudo dscl localhost create /Local/Default/Users/git PrimaryGroupID 20    # Staff group
sudo dscl localhost create /Local/Default/Users/git UserShell /usr/bin/git-shell    # No shell access allowed!
sudo dscl localhost create /Local/Default/Users/git NFSHomeDirectory /usr/local/gitrepo
</code>

# Set up git-shell as a valid shell
Now there's a `git` user, but it needs a bit more work before we're ready to roll.
    sudo emacs -nw /etc/shells
Add `/usr/bin/git-shell` to the list of valid shells so that ssh access will work.

# Allow the git user to use ssh
The macOS Sharing setting in Preferences can be used to lock down ssh (or "Remote Login", as it's called on macOS). The new `git` user will need to be allowed to use ssh. This turns out to be easy:

    sudo dseditgroup -o edit -t user -a git com.apple.access_ssh

and done!

# Create the git user's home directory
I decided to put the git user's directory in `/usr/local/gitrepo`.
We'll need to make that directory, and then add a `.ssh` directory in there to hold the `authorized_keys`. Here's how:
<code>
sudo mkdir /usr/local/gitrepo
sudo mkdir /usr/local/gitrepo/.ssh
sudo chmod 700 .ssh
sudo touch .ssh/authorized_keys && chmod 600 .ssh/authorized_keys
sudo chown -R git /usr/local/gitrepo
</code>

# Make an bare repo for your project
In this case, my project is named `learning_go`. I'm going to make a bare repo with that name:

<code>
sudo --user git bash # get a shell as the git user
cd /usr/local/gitrepo
mkdir learning_go.git
cd learning_go.git
git init -bare
</code>

# Set up ssh pubkeys for your users
We've blocked the git user from having password-driven authentication, so we now need to add our SSH keypair pubkeys to the git user's account.
You'll find your pubkey in the file `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`. If you don't have one of those, make a keypair by running: `ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 4096 -C "me@example.com"` (of course, replace me@example.com with your own email address).

Now you'll need to add the contents of the `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` to the git account. This is easy to do, but a little tricky because the git user can't read your pubkey, and you can't write it to the `authorized_keys` file as anyone other than the git user (or root). This is where the /tmp directory comes into play!

<code>
cp ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub /tmp/user.pubkey
sudo --user git bash
cd /usr/local/gitrepo/.ssh
cat /tmp/user.pubkey >> authorized_keys
</code>

# Test it out!
At this point you should be about ready to test.
Try to ssh to your server, from the user account where the pubkey came from:

    ssh git@localhost

You should see something like `fatal: Interactive git shell is not enabled.`
